Add pages for dApps (#31)
open-5g/openrangym: _posts/tutorials/2025-01-24-dapps-oai.md

---
layout: post

> title: "Deploying a dApp for Spectrum Sharing on an OpenAirInterface gNB"

Author: Check now I have reworked it

> title: "Deploying a dApp for Spectrum Sharing on a OpenAirInterface (OAI) gNB"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Deploying a dApp for Spectrum Sharing on an OpenAirInterface gNB"
```

date: 2025-01-24
category: tutorials
author: Andrea Lacava
short-description: How to run a Spectrum Sharing dApp leveraging our open source dApp framework and OpenAirInterface
---

{% assign publications = site.data.publications %}

{% assign el = publications.publications | where: "name", "lacava2025dapps" %}
{% assign element = el[0] %}
{% capture pub_lacava2025dapps %}
{% include pub-template.html %}
{% endcapture %}

> dApps are software components that can execute as microservices, designed to be co-located with \glspl{cu} and \glspl{du}, where user-plane data is readily available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dApps are real-time O-RAN applications that execute as microservices. They are designed to be co-located with the CU/DU, where user-plane data is readily available.
```

Reviewer: Also add reference to page on RAN frameworks

Author: Which page?

> Currently, the adoption of dApps is under investigation by the \oran \ngrg as a way to bring below 10\,ms \aiml routines to the \ran.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the adoption of dApps is under investigation by the O-RAN next Generation Research Group (nGRG) as a way to bring below 10 ms Artificial Intelligence (AI) routines to the RAN.
```

{: .text-justify}

<img src="/assets/post-assets/dapps.png" class="post-image" alt="dApp Architecture" width="75%">

In this tutorial, we show how setup a 5G networks composed by one gNB and one dApp that performs spectrum sharing.
{: .text-justify}

## gNB Setup

> We first start by cloning and setup the OAI repository with the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first start by cloning and setting up the OAI repository with the following commands:
```

{% highlight bash %}
git clone https://github.com/wineslab/dApp-openairinterface5g openairinterface5g
cd openairinterface5g
{% endhighlight %}

> Then we can install and build OAI including the dApp extension, which is enabled by the flag `--build-e3`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, we install and build OAI, including the dApp extension, which is enabled by the flag `--build-e3`:
```

{% highlight bash %}
source oaienv

cd ./cmake_targets/

# export UHD_VERSION=4.4.0. # if needed to select the version of UHD
./build_oai -I # this must be done only once to install the dependencies of OAI 

./build_oai -w USRP --ninja --gNB --build-e3 --cmake-opt "-DCMAKE_C_FLAGS=-march=native -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS=-march=native"
cd ;
{% endhighlight %}

> Finally, we can run OAI should always be launched _before_ running the dApp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we run OAI, which should always be launched _before_ running the dApp.
```

Moreover, make sure that `do_SRS` flag is set to 0.
An example of launching OAI can be this one:

{% highlight bash %}
OAI_CONFIG_DIR="../../../targets/PROJECTS/GENERIC-NR-5GC/CONF/"

# x310 configuration 
OAI_CONFIG_FILE="gnb.band78.sa.fr1.106PRB.usrpx300.conf"

# x410 configuration
# OAI_CONFIG_FILE="gnb.band78.sa.fr1.106PRB.usrpx400.conf"

# b210 configuration (not tested in a while, may not work)
# OAI_CONFIG_FILE="gnb.sa.band78.fr1.106PRB.usrpb210.conf"

source oaienv
cd ./cmake_targets/ran_build/build

# x310 and x410
# gdb --args # if needed
taskset -ca 0-45 ./nr-softmodem -O ${OAI_CONFIG_DIR}${OAI_CONFIG_FILE} --gNBs.[0].min_rxtxtime 6 --sa --usrp-tx-thread-config 1  -E --T_stdout 2 --gNBs.[0].do_SRS 0

# b210
# ./nr-softmodem -O ${OAI_CONFIG_DIR}${OAI_CONFIG_FILE} --gNBs.[0].min_rxtxtime 6 --sa --usrp-tx-thread-config 1 -E  --T_stdout  2
{% endhighlight %}

> Note that the x310 configuration has been successfully tested Over The Air and on Colosseum (with and without control).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the x310 configuration has been successfully tested over-the-air and on Colosseum (with and without control).
```

## dApp Setup

To create the dApp, clone its repository with the following commands:

{% highlight bash %}
git clone https://github.com/wineslab/dApp-library dApp
cd dApp
{% endhighlight %}

> Finally, to start the dapp the command is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, start the dapp with the following command:
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Leveraging the dApp Framework for Spectrum Sharing"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "dApp Framework Tutorial: Deploy and Extend dApps"
```

date: 2025-01-24
category: tutorials
author: Andrea Lacava

> short-description: A generalized guide to deploying and extending the dApp framework for spectrum sharing and other applications in 5G networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
short-description: A tutorial on how to deploy and extend the dApp framework, with a use case for spectrum sharing.
```

This tutorial demonstrates how to set up and leverage our dApp framework with OpenAirInterface (OAI) to perform spectrum sharing. 
Additionally, we provide guidance on how this framework can be adapted to other use cases in 5G and beyond.
{: .text-justify}

The dApp framework is designed for co-location with the CU/DU, where it can interact directly with user-plane data.
The modularity of our framework ensures flexibility, allowing developers to tailor it to various spectrum-sharing scenarios or extend it for other AI-driven optimizations in network management.
It features:
- **Extensibility:** Modular design of the classes that can be extended for custom use cases.
- **Adaptability:** Works with diverse configurations, including over-the-air (OTA) environments and wireless testing platforms like Colosseum.
- **Real-Time Capabilities:** Designed to meet the sub-10 ms latency requirements of O-RAN, with control loops periodicity below 1 μs.
{: .text-justify}

This tutorial outlines the setup process and discusses how to customize the framework for different applications.
{: .text-justify}

> ### General Setup for Spectrum Sharing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### dApp Setup
```
